>>Nearly 900 years
ago, the Holy Land
was home to one of the most
extraordinary organizations
that has ever existed.
The Knights of the
Temple of Solomon
were elite warriors,
unparalleled entrepreneurs,
and devoted men of God, ready
at any moment to kill and die.
They had one mission: to
define the Christian Holy Land.
After a severe mauling by
the legendary Islamic leader
Saladin, the Knights
Templar had mobilized
their enormous financial
resources in Western Europe.
Front line defenses had been
reconstructed and garrisoned,
but how long could the
outnumbered Templars hold out
against an enemy that had all
the logistical advantages,
and just how dangerous were
their opponents back in Western
Europe, envious of
their land and wealth?
A Knight of the Temple of
Solomon, recruited in Europe
and sent to the front
line in the Holy Land,
soon became hardened to
the conditions of the east.
As monks of the
Catholic Church, they
were well accustomed
to strict discipline,
and their every moment, awake
and asleep, was regulated.
Each day was taken up with
prayer, work, and above all,
constant training for battle.
There was no leisure time,
and, in fact, most of the time,
there was not much
battle, either.
Warfare was expensive
in men and horses,
and for decades, the
order had generally
pursued a cautious
policy in the east.
This policy had even
included negotiating truces
with local Islamic
leaders, which
made other Crusaders
deeply uneasy,
especially when they
negotiated with the leader
of the Shiite Muslim sect
called the Assassins.
The Templars had no qualms in
implementing any policy that
strengthened their
position in the east.
>>They're not just
professional soldiers;
the Templars are the
professional defenders
of the frontier, and that's
more than just military.
It has to be diplomatic, it
has to be political and so on,
so maybe this is why
the Templars picked
up on the possibility of an
alliance with the Assassins
more readily than did the
secular rulers of the Crusader
states.
>>Pilgrims and Crusaders
visiting the Holy Land
for the first time were
often angry to discover
that the resident
Crusaders had negotiated
a truce with the Muslim enemy.
They had spent a great
deal of money to get there
and had traveled far.
Newly arrived
travelers could not
believe that any Christians,
especially the Templars,
even talked to the Muslims.
>>Fundamentally,
they were intolerant
on an everyday basis.
For much of the time, they
had to be tolerant-- it's just
a matter of common sense
and an ability to exist.
These people are not stupid.
Their beliefs were intolerant--
much more intolerant
than ours are
today, but they were
living, as I said,
on a frontier.
They had to deal
with their neighbors.
They were not in a position
to wage perpetual war.
They knew it, their leaders
knew it, everybody knew it.
So pragmatism-- I won't say
it was the order of the day,
but they were perfectly willing
and capable of being pragmatic.
This does not make
them different
to other Medieval people.
>>So there were many day to day
contacts between all the Franks
in the east, and some of
these are very colorfully
described by a Damascene
chronicler called
Usama ibn Munqidh.
One of these stories is
the most well known one
about a Frank newly
arrived from the west, who
forces Usama to pray facing
east, and one of the Templars
intervenes, apologizes
to Usama, and says,
no, this man is a newcomer, he
doesn't understand our ways,
you can pray in
whatever way you wish.
And this has sometimes
been presented
as showing that
the Templars were
very friendly with
the Muslims, but I
think it really shows much
more, that in daily life,
Templars and other Franks
had frequent contact
with the Muslims.
Many of them spoke Arabic, many
more than has been previously
said, spoke Arabic, I think.
So it was necessary,
in order to exist,
to have these daily contacts,
but that doesn't necessarily
affect their commitment
to the Holy War.
>>Although the Templars
had, time and time again,
proved themselves to be
dedicated enemies of Islam,
there would always
be rumors that they
fraternized with the enemy.
One day, the Templars
would actually
be accused of secretly
being Muslims themselves.
By joining the Order of
the Temple of Solomon,
a knight believed he
was purifying himself
of the corruption, temptation,
and superficialities
of the transitory world.
As such, he was to lead
a hardworking, sober life
of sacrifice,
dedication, and humility.
For humility is the
guardian of all virtues,
but few people ever saw much
humility in the Templars.
As individuals, the
Templars stood apart
with their white
robes and red cross.
As an organization, the Order
of the Temple of Solomon
prized its independence.
Templar castles ruled
their surrounding areas
with complete automony.
They brought little or no
interference from the king.
The temple often pursued
its own strategies,
even in direct opposition to
the overall Crusader policy.
Early in the 13th century,
the Christian enclave
in the Holy Land stretched
from Antioch to Arsur,
and the Templars now
controlled a major proportion
of this from their castles
at Atlit, Chastel Blanc,
and in the mountains
around Antioc.
The undying aim of
all the Crusaders
remained the capture of
Jerusalem for Christianity.
The next opportunity arrived
at the Fifth Crusade,
whose leaders believed that the
only way to secure Jerusalem
was by first conquering
Egypt itself.
The Templars joined the Fifth
Crusade, whose objective
was Egypt's capital, Cairo.
The city of Damietta
was the first obstacle
facing the Crusaders.
The Christian siege of
Damietta was long and bitter,
but finally, the Crusaders
overwhelmed the Muslims.
This so shocked
the Sultan of Egypt
that he immediately
offered to surrender
the Kingdom of Jerusalem if they
would return the captured city
and leave.
The Christians hesitated.
They were expecting
reinforcements
from Emperor Frederick II, who
had vowed to go on Crusade.
If Frederick's forces
arrived in time,
Cairo itself would be
an attainable goal.
While the Christians
hesitated, the Muslims
prepared their defenses.
Twenty months after the
capture of Damietta,
the Fifth Crusade
finally headed south.
The Egyptians easily
cut their supply line
and flooded the valley.
The Christians accepted
the sultan's next offer--
they returned
Damietta and he let
them escape with their lives.
The failure of Emperor Frederick
II to arrive in the Holy Land
almost certainly resulted
in the destruction
of the Fifth Crusade.
>>Frederick eventually
went on crusade in 1228
but was forced to turn
back because of illness,
and the papacy excommunicated
him as a result.
Frederick wasn't deterred by
this-- he then set out again,
but this very much
complicated his relations
with the powers that
already existed in Cyprus
and on the mainland
when he arrived there,
and it became rather
difficult for them
to have dealings with
him in the long term.
Moreover, Frederick expected
his own will to be obeyed.
He had a quasi absolutist regime
in the Kingdom of Sicily, which
was one of the important
parts of his empire,
and he found it
difficult to deal
with military orders, accustomed
to being at least semi
independent, and a
Jerusalem baronage which
had a very highly developed
sense of its legal rights.
So from the very
beginning, Frederick
was in conflict with
important powers in the east,
and this included the Templars.
>>As an order of
the Catholic Church,
the Templars were not
supposed to have dealings
with the excommunicated
Frederick,
but their conflict
with the German emperor
had begun much earlier.
Back in Europe,
Frederick had angrily
complained that the Templar
network had purchased so much
of his lands in
Italy that it was
trying to control
his entire kingdom.
After quarreling with the
Crusaders in the east,
Frederick II headed
down the coast
and actually met with
the Sultan of Egypt.
At the city of Jaffa, he
signed a sensational treaty.
The Egyptians voluntarily
ceded back part of the Kingdom
of Jerusalem, including the Holy
City itself, to the Christians.
Almost single handedly,
and without bloodshed,
the excommunicate German
emperor had finally
recovered Jerusalem
for Christianity.
Frederick then went to the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre
and had himself crowned.
The Christians resident in the
west, especially the Templars,
were not impressed with
Frederick's achievement,
as one of the
clauses of the treaty
prevented the repair
of any fortifications
in around the Holy City.
>>There does seem, thereafter,
to have been a period of enmity
between the military
orders, particularly
between Frederick II and
the Templars, which resulted
in a number of confiscations
of Templar lands
in Frederick's lands in Italy
when he returned to the west
in 1229.
One of the consequences of
the enmity between Frederick
and the Templars was
the Templars' refusal
to accept the treaties
that Frederick had signed,
and, indeed, there are
some sources that claim,
I think wrongly,
but claim that there
was a plot to murder Frederick
and that the Templars were
involved in that plot.
>>His approach was one
of attempted coexistence
on what we believe to have
been a long term basis.
He was trying to achieve
peace in the true sense of it,
whereas what the Templars
had done in the past,
in terms of coexistence,
was temporary.
They were making sort of
strategic truces and so on,
so their approach was
fundamentally different.
>>Frederick's negotiation
with the Egyptian
had greatly increased
the Crusaders' territory
in the Holy Land.
Over the next few
years, further Crusades
by Theobald of Champagne
and Richard of Cornwall
used both military
action and negotiations
to increase the Christian
state to the largest
it had been for 50 years.
Despite the apparent success
of the Crusader state,
the Knights Templar
still refused
to acknowledge
Frederick's treaty
with the Sultan of Egypt,
and they steadfastly
pursued their own policies.
The Templars opened
negotiation with Egypt's rival,
the Sultan of Damascus.
The Templars believed the
Egyptian empire was growing
weak, a situation they
felt the Crusaders should
be exploiting to the full.
>>The fact is that the
Muslim states of that region
had other and far more
important things to worry about,
most obviously the Mongols,
who, unlike the Crusaders,
did pose a mortal
threat, certainly
were perceived as
posing a mortal threat,
to the Muslim world, to the
whole civilization of Islam.
It was on an entirely
different level,
even compared with
the First Crusade.
>>The Mongol Empire
created by Genghis Khan
had expanded across
half a continent
and now threatened the
Islamic and Christian states.
Fleeing the Mongol
Horde was an army
called the Khwarazm, who
also posed a grave threat
to the Christian state.
The westernmost Islamic
leader, the Sultan of Damascus,
felt most threatened, and he had
accepted a nonaggression treaty
with the Templars
in which he gave
them back their old
castle of Safad.
The Sultan of Egypt was stunned
and immediately allied himself
with the Khwarazm.
The Crusader state
was surrounded.
The Khwarazm struck
first, invading Palestine
and attacking Damascus.
The Christians assembled
the largest force
they could, and together
with the Sultan of Damascus,
took the field at La Forbie.
Their Muslim allies
deserted and the Egyptians
crushed the Christians in one
of the most devastating battles
of the century.
Ninety percent of the Templar
force in the Holy Land
had been killed at the
Battle of La Forbie,
but many Christians,
especially Frederick II,
squarely blamed the Knights
Templar for the catastrophe.
The crisis deepened
over the next few years
as the weakened
Crusader state lost
some of its most
powerful castles.
Frederick accused the
Templars of perpetuating war
for their own ends.
He claimed that the military
order could not exist in peace,
and that's why
they had sabotaged
his treaty with the Egyptians.
Frederick was not the
first to accuse the Knights
Templar of warmongering, and
he would not be the last.
The King of France,
Louis IX, was
the first to respond to the
Crusaders' frantic pleas
for help.
Louis arrived in
the east in 1248
with a diverse contingent
of European knights.
Louis decided to follow the
strategy of previous Crusades,
attempting to knock out Egypt
before taking Jerusalem.
>>Unfortunately,
it's very difficult
to attack Egypt
because of the Nile,
because of the series of
canals that crisscrossed
the various branches
of the Nile,
and one couldn't
necessarily move one's army
across these branches
all in one go,
and there was one very
important incident when
the Templars, together with the
Earl of Salisbury and Robert
of Artois, who was a younger
brother of King Louis
IX of France, had already
crossed one branch of the Nile
and were opposite the
Egyptian town of Mansoura.
Robet of Artois,
keen to gain glory,
wanted to attack Mansoura.
It would appear that
the Templars wished
to adopt their usual,
rather cautious policy
and wait for the rest of the
army, but when Robert of Artois
insisted, using, as
one chronicler said,
foul and abusive words that were
characteristic of the French,
the Templars agreed
to go along with this,
but it proved to be a
disaster because Mansoura was
a town with small,
tight streets,
quite inappropriate for a
mounted attack of the sort
that the Count of Artois and the
Templars were forced to make,
and many of them were trapped
in these narrow streets
and were killed, so by the time
the bulk of the army appeared,
this had turned from
what was planned
to be a glorious
attack into a riot.
>>The disaster of Mansoura
had seen the entire vanguard
of the Crusader Army eliminated.
Whatever the motivation for the
Templar assault on Monsoura,
the Templars had
found themselves
central to yet
another catastrophe.
They had lost 200 knights
and another grand master
had been killed in battle.
The retreating Christians
were eventually surrounded,
and Louis IX, the
King of France,
surrendered to the
Egyptian Sultan.
He was put up for an enormous
ransom of 400,000 livre de
Tours at a time when the annual
income of the entire Kingdom
of France was 250,000 livre.
Templar treasure
ships waiting offshore
were targeted by the
king's entourage,
for the Templars refused
to release the money,
as much of it had been deposited
with them for safekeeping
by other Crusaders.
>>In fact, there wasn't
any obvious conflict.
A member of the King's
entourage broke the locks
of some of these trunks
of money in the presence
of the Templars, who made
a symbolic objection.
In that way, the
Templars managed
to maintain their integrity
while still making
a contribution towards
the King's ransom.
>>Immediately on
his release, Louis
went to the Crusader
city of Acre,
where he remained
for four years.
Despite the Templars'
support for the French king,
they would not abandon their
own policies in the Holy Land.
While Louis hoped to
make peace with Egypt,
he caught the Templars
negotiating, once more,
with the Muslim
city of Damascus.
Louis was shocked and forced the
Templars to submit and repent.
When Louis IX eventually
sailed for home,
the Christian Holy Land lost not
just his substantial resources,
but also one of the few leaders
who could unify the state
and keep the Templars in line.
Not long after, the
Crusaders' situation
took a turn for the worse.
The Mongols were
on the move again,
and Egypt had undergone a coup,
and a new power, the Mamluks,
began carving an
empire for itself.
The Mamluks
recognized the Mongols
to be a far greater threat
than the Christians.
By the year 1260, the Mongols
had sacked Baghdad, Aleppo,
and Damascus, leaving no Islamic
power east of the Christians.
The ever diminishing sliver
of the Christian Holy Land
stood between the world's
two most powerful armies.
Incredibly, the Crusaders
allowed the Muslims
to pass through their land en
route to the Mongol Hordes.
At the Battle of Ayn
Jalot, it was the Mamluks
who were victorious, inflicting
the first major defeat
on the Mongol Empire.
The Crusader leaders
quickly made peace
with the victorious
Mamluk Sultan of Egypt,
but the Templars
and the Hospittalers
refused to hand over their
lucrative Muslim prisoners
of war.
The Mamluks
immediately retaliated.
The Mamluk advance was slow,
but methodical and relentless.
>>The last campaigns of the
crusading epic in the Middle
East, in the Holy Land, are
campaigns of siege warfare.
The Crusaders are
in their castles
in their fortified
cities-- in fact,
essentially in their
fortified cities--
we can almost forget the castles
in this last few decades,
and the Muslim
armies are seeking
to take these powerfully
defended, strongly walled,
fortified cities
and a few castles.
Siege warfare is slow.
The-- it's before
gunpowder, of course,
so even though the Muslim armies
were extremely sophisticated
in this kind of warfare,
it was a slow process.
>>In the early 1260s,
the Mamluk concentrated
on the southern Christian lands.
In the late 1260s, they took
Antioch and the Templars
abandoned the enclave.
In the 1270s, the
Tripoli enclave crumbled.
Only the arrival of
Prince Edward of England,
the future Edward I, with
10,000 Mongol allies,
enabled a decade long truce,
but before the truce was up,
the Mamluks decided to
finish the Christians
once and for all.
In 1290, the Mamluks
assembled 60,000 cavalry,
160,000 infantry, and 100
Mangonel siege engines
around the Christian
capital of Acre.
The temple compound was
the last building to fall,
and the grand master and
all the remaining Templars
were killed in the fighting.
On August 14, 1291,
the Knights Templars
evacuated their last
standing castle at Atlit
and set up their new
headquarters on Cyprus.
The Templar castle of
Atlit was the greatest
they had ever built and had
never been taken by siege.
The Mamluks demolished it
so it could never again
be used against the
forces of Islam.
The destruction of the last
Crusader stronghold in the Holy
Land was proof to
many in the west
that God no longer
approved of such violence.
>>By the 13th century,
the crusading ideal
was recognized as something of
a dream, an impossible dream.
There were many
who liked the idea
as a sort of romantic, epic,
heroic, religious concept,
but as far as large numbers
of the knightly elite,
the educated classes,
and the rising
bourgeoisie of the towns wanting
to make sacrifices for this,
the idea had become impractical.
So I think it would
be quite fair to say
that the Templars and the
other crusading orders
were left high and dry.
>>The Knights Templar
were now more vulnerable
than they could
possibly imagine.
Their entire reason for being
was the defense Holy Land,
and they had failed.
But the Templars were still an
order of the Catholic Church--
any move against
the Templars would
be a direct assault
on the papacy itself.
While the Order of the Temple
mustered its forces once more
for yet another Crusade
against the Muslims,
storm clouds were
gathering back in Europe.
The Order of the
Temple of Solomon
was about to find itself
caught in the middle
of a cataclysmic
power struggle that
would shake Western
Europe to the very core.